Policy 1.1: Preserve the rural atmosphere of the community and assure “elbow room” in areas designated for lower density development by guiding new development into the Urban Core to conform to the historic Colony land use patterns of the City and to respect the natural environment, hillside areas, and existing neighborhoods.
Policy 1.2: Ensure the rural character of Atascadero is preserved by respecting the historic Colony boundaries and cooperate with the County on regional planning issues surrounding the Colony.
Policy 1.3: Enhance the rural character and appearance of the City, including commercial corridors, gateways and public facilities.
Policy 1.4: Ensure that “darkness” remain a rural characteristic by requiring that all exterior lighting does not result in significant off-site spillage or glare.

Policy 2.1: Ensure that new development is compatible with existing and surrounding neighborhoods.
Policy 2.2: Allow for the orderly development of neighborhoods by allowing for the consideration of lot size reductions for lots that are significantly larger than the surrounding neighborhood.
Policy 2.3: Incorporate Pedestrian and Transit Oriented design concepts into new residential and commercial development within the Urban Core.

Policy 3.1: Encourage retail businesses at efficient and attractive nodes along El Camino Real and Morro Road with mixed office and residential uses between those nodes.

Policy 4.1: Cooperate with the Atascadero Main Street Organization to promote downtown as the City’s cultural, entertainment, and commercial center, and to concentrate governmental facilities downtown.
Policy 4.2: Enhance the appearance of the downtown area and improve pedestrian circulation.

Policy 5.1: Reduce multi-family densities and increase single-family lot sizes as site slope increases.
Policy 5.2: Require hillside development and subdivisions to blend in with surrounding topography.
Policy 5.3: Prevent unnecessarily intensive grading of development sites. 

Policy 6.1: Ensure that development does not degrade scenic and sensitive areas, including historic sites, creeks, riparian corridors, wetlands, woodlands, hillsides and other valuable habitats.
Policy 6.2: Protect prehistoric cultural resources from disturbance associated with development.
Policy 6.3: Encourage conservation and preservation of neighborhoods, Colony Homes and sound housing, including places and buildings of historical and architectural significance.
Policy 6.4: Encourage conservation and preservation of structures and houses that have historical and architectural significance.

Policy 7.1: Ensure that the native trees of Atascadero are protected from new development in order to retain the natural character of the community.
Policy 7.2: Protect and replenish native tree populations, including saplings.

Policy 8.1: Ensure that development along Atascadero Creek, Graves Creeks, the Salinas River, blue line creeks, and natural springs, lakes, or other riparian areas does not interrupt natural flows or adversely impact riparian ecosystems and water quality.
Policy 8.2: Establish and maintain setbacks and development standards for creek side development.
Policy 8.3: Preserve public creek reserves for public access, and ensure that recreational use does not impact habitat value and open space qualities.
Policy 8.4: Review and regulate all proposed on-site wastewater disposal systems to protect public health and water quality.
Policy 8.5: The City shall implement a storm water control program consistent with the requirements of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Program (Phase II).

Policy 9.1. Allow agricultural practices, including keeping livestock and farm animals, on parcels of appropriate size in Rural Estate, Suburban Estate, and Single Family Residential areas, provided that natural features and residential neighbors will not be adversely impacted.
Policy 9.2 Adequately regulate allowed agricultural practices and keeping of domestic animals on rural and agricultural lands consistent with the farm animal regulations of the City Zoning Ordinance.

Policy 10.1: Ensure efficient and adequate solid waste disposal by reducing waste volumes through recycling and other methods.
Policy 10.2: Support ongoing water conservation efforts. 
Policy 10.3: Support regional efforts to maintain clean air.
Policy 10.4: Ensure that development in mineral resource areas is appropriate and compatible with existing uses.
Policy 10.5: Encourage soil conservation by minimizing grading and preventing erosion. 
Policy 10.6: Utilize new technologies to improve convenience for City residents, reduce dependency on nonrenewable resources, increase ecological and financial efficiencies, and better inform the citizenry

Policy 11.1: Acquire parkland needed for future development of park and recreation facilities and ensure that park improvements are consistent with adopted master plans to accommodate future growth.
Policy 11.2: Encourage joint use of school facilities for public recreation purposes.
Policy 11.3: Encourage park development on or adjacent to schools where appropriate.
Policy 11.4: Encourage cooperative park and facility development programs.
Policy 11.5: Develop a method of financing park and recreational facilities and services throughout the City using a variety of revenue sources.

Policy 12.1: Provide specialized recreation opportunities based on projected needs and standards identified in parks master plans.
Policy 12.2: Emphasize the importance of recreation facilities as community resources.
Policy 12.3: Develop and implement a program to improve water quality in Atascadero Lake with specific water quality standards to be provided in the Parks and Recreation Master Plan.

Policy 13.1: Facilitate convenient location of goods and services needed by local residents.
Policy 13.2: Encourage planned office development in appropriate locations.
Policy 13.3: Expand tourist commercial nodes to serve the traveling public at freeway interchanges and develop tourist destinations based on the Atascadero's rural character.
Policy 13.4: The City shall continue to take a long range view of its fiscal condition, and specifically the possibility of enhancing revenues, in order to maintain and, where ever possible and desirable, enhance current levels of service.

Policy 14.1: Encourage existing uses to continue providing needed products and services. 
Policy 14.2: Attract new development and land uses that provide jobs and services for residents, provided that those uses are consistent with the City’s character.
Policy 14.3: Plan for a regional commercial center near Highway 101. 
Policy 14.4: Ensure that City regulations and processes support economic development opportunities.

Policy 15.1: Growth should be directed to areas where services can be provided in a cost- effective manner.
Policy 15.2: Maintain an updated Capital Improvements Program (CIP) that forecasts needs at least five years into the future and conforms to General Plan policies and programs.
Policy 15.3: Ensure that adequate service capacity and facilities exist prior to approving new development.
Policy 15.4: Extend services only when the City has funding for additional improvements identified in the CIP.
Policy 15.5: Two tiers of public service will be provided within the City based on the Urban Services Line (USL).
Policy 15.6: Ensure that new development pays the cost of providing and/or installing all capital facilities needed to support it, including the infrastructure necessary to attract high-tech and professional support businesses.
Policy 15.7: Continue to support effective regional planning for solid and hazardous waste disposal.
Policy 15.8: Support expansion of the County library. 
Policy 15.9: Ensure high quality educational facilities and services are provided to the community.
Policy 15.10: Require public agency and private utilities development projects in the City to conform to City site improvement standards.

Policy 16.1: The General Plan shall be adopted by City Council resolution. 

